INTRODUCTION

Many factors, such as food, housing, clothing, hygiene
and sanitation, lifestyle, pollution, climate, etc., can
affect the health of an individual and population.
Health care includes all services provided to a person
or population by various health and related agencies.

17H62cHOI

These are delivered by the health care system, which
includes the management of the health sector and its

organisational structure.

This unit imparts knowledge
to students about India’s
health care system, personal
hygiene practices and codes

of conduct to be followed by a &'

General Duty Assistant (GDA).

It explains the role of a GDA &

and supporting departments
in the functioning of a hospital,
reflecting the changing concept

of hospitals, role of a hospital |

administrator, functions of
the hospital management and
hospital services. With the
advancement in technology,
the management of a hospital

Fig. 1.1 A hospital

fay

woe

95

OS

Notes

a

ra

is designed using various software, which coordinate
all aspects of hospital operations. From front office
management to most extensive procedures — all are
performed in a hospital. It is, thus, interlinked to make
the functioning easier for patients.

Session 1 deals with the service network of primary,
private and community health centres in India.

The GDA assists doctors, nurses and other support
staff while working in a hospital set up. Being informed
about the duties, role and limitations, s/he benefits
more by focusing on quality work. Securing personnel
rights or understanding the codes of conduct related
to a job role is expected to bring efficiency towards
work commitment that ultimately improves patient
care standards. The GDA’s duty is to ensure patients’
comfort, assist doctors and nurses, and maintain a
clean and hygienic environment in the hospital.

The second and third sessions give an insight into
the role, qualities and functions of a GDA.

Session 4 enumerates the importance of hygiene,
hand washing and personal grooming for a GDA.
Personal hygiene supplements good health. Neglect
of cleanliness may cause many infectious diseases.
Therefore, improvement in hygiene standards can
prevent many epidemics. The contribution of every
individual in maintaining personal and environmental
hygiene influences the health standard index of the
society. We follow a set sequence of oral hygiene,
bathing, dressing, etc., which inculcates in us the
habit of keeping our body clean. By understanding the
contents in the unit, you will learn about how to wash
hands and personal grooming, and how these help in
maintaining a healthy life.

Session 1: HeEattH Care DELIVERY SYSTEM

Health care systems

According to the World Health Organization (WHO),“A
health system consists of all organizations, people and
actions, whose primary intent is to promote, restore
or maintain health. This includes efforts to influence

GENERAL Duty Assistant — Ciass XI

determinants of health, as well as, more direct health
improving activities. A health system is, therefore,
more than the pyramid of publicly owned facilities
that deliver personal health services. It includes, for
example, a mother caring for her sick child at home,
private providers, behavior change programs, vector-
control campaigns, health insurance organizations,
occupational health and safety legislation. It includes
inter-sectoral action by health staff, for example,
encouraging the ministry of education to promote female
education, a well-known determinant of better health.”

Health care in India is a State issue. It is delivered
by institutions owned by the Central and State
governments, and local bodies. The Centre is responsible
for developing and monitoring national standards and
regulations, linking the States with funding agencies,
and sponsoring schemes for the effective implementation
of health programmes. Most health care services in India
are provided by the private sector. The government and
the private sector help in making health care accessible
in all areas of India — both rural and urban.

The health care system or models in India can be
categorised under the following sectors or programmes:

Public health sector

Primary health care

¢ Village-level accredited social health activist

¢ Village-level Auxiliary Nurse Midwife (ANM), a
village-level health worker, who is the first contact
person between the community and health services

¢ Sub-centres

¢ Primary Health Centre

Hospitals or health centres
¢ Community Health Centres
¢ Rural hospitals
¢ District hospitals or health centres
¢ Specialty hospitals
¢ Teaching hospitals

HospiraL MANAGEMENT SYSTEM

Give it a thought...

Even though most of the
Indian population lives in
villages or rural areas, there
are more hospitals in urban
areas. Why? Give reasons.

fay

woe

95

A

Notes

a

ra

Private sector

e Private hospitals, polyclinics, nursing homes and
dispensaries
¢ General practitioners and clinics

Levels of medical care

Health care services are, generally, categorised at four
levels, viz., primary, secondary, tertiary and quaternary.
These levels represent different types of care, involving
varied degrees of complexity.

Primary care level

Primary care providers may be doctors, nurses or
physician assistants. It is the first level of contact with
individuals, family and community, where primary
health care (essential health care) is provided. Most of
the health problems of people can be addressed at this
level. It is at this level that health care will be the most
effective. In the Indian context, primary health care is
provided by Primary Health Centres (PHCs) and their
sub-centres through multipurpose health workers,
village health guides and trained health care workers.
Besides providing primary health care, village health
care centres bridge cultural and communication gaps
between rural people and the organised health sector.

Secondary care level

The next level is secondary (intermediate) health care.
At this level, more complex problems are dealt with. In
India, this kind of care is, generally, provided by district
hospitals and community health care centres, which also
serve as the first referral point. Secondary care means
a patient will be taken care of by specialists. These
specialists focus either on a specific body system/ part or
a specific disease or condition. For example, if someone
has a heart problem, the person needs to consult a
cardiologist. If someone is suffering from problems
related to hormones and diseases, like diabetes or
thyroid, then s/he must consult an endocrinologist.

GENERAL Duty Assistant — Ciass XI

Tertiary care level

The tertiary level is more specialised than secondary
care level. It requires specific facilities and attention
of highly specialised health workers. It is provided by
regional or central level institutions. For example, highly
specialised equipment and expertise is required to treat
coronary artery bypass surgery.

Quaternary care

It is an extension of tertiary care, and is more specialised
and highly unusual. All hospitals or medical centres
cannot provide quaternary care. It includes experimental
medicines and procedures.

Meaning of hospital

According to the World Health Organization (WHO),
a hospital is an integral part of social and medical
organisation, the function of which is to provide
complete health care — both preventive and curative —
to the population. The outpatient services of a hospital
reach out to communities in an area. The hospital also
serves as a centre for the training of health workers and
carries out bio-social researches.

Think, learn and discuss...

Find out the different health
care delivery systems or
models followed across
the world and discuss their
pros and cons in class.

A hospital is a system with
various components that are _

. ni ; Other i
integrated by a common purpose | Clinical and REISE eeemicnd
jevi « . nursing services
of achieving a set of objectives.
The various sy SueKIS and sub- * Outpatient/ | Clinical | Non-clinical| Personnel,
systems of a hospital has been inpatient services support of finance and
« Emergency

represented in Fig. 1.2. ea dlattets
The performance of all these services
services is dependent on the
cooperation and_ coordination
of various components within the system. Individual
sub-systems have independent goals for providing
the best patient care. It can be inferred that hospitals
are highly complex, social, economic and scientific
organisations whose function is to provide comprehensive
health care services.

HospiraL MANAGEMENT SYSTEM

services

———

Assistant

Fig. 1.2 Components of a hospital

Search and learn...

Find out about health care
systems near your area and
categorise them according
to the functions they
perform.

.
wf

95

ra

This explains the need for the sound management of
a hospital. It is the management that helps in managing
the functioning of the hospital or a health unit. It
integrates various departments of a health care unit,
like clinical, non-clinical and supporting departments.
Health care services must be comprehensive, preventive,
curative and rehabilitative. These services are provided
through a network of various primary, private and
community health centres in India.

Functions of a hospital

The purpose of health care services is to effectively meet
all the health needs of a community. Hospitals play a
major role in maintaining and restoring the health of
the community. The main functions of hospitals are
as follows:

e restorative

* preventive

¢ training and research in health and medicine

Restorative functions

The various restorative functions of a hospital include
the following:

Diagnostic activity
It includes inpatient services, involving medical, surgical
and other specialties, and specific diagnostic procedures.

Curative activity
It involves the treatment of all ailments or diseases.

Rehabilitative activity
It includes physical, mental and social rehabilitation.

Emergency services

It comprises providing emergency services required for
dealing with accidents, natural disasters, epidemics, etc.

Preventive functions
Hospitals also carry out various preventive functions,
which include the following:
* supervision of pregnancies and childbirth
* supervision of normal growth and development
of children

GENERAL Duty Assistant — Ciass XI

¢ control of communicable diseases

* prevention of prolonged illness

¢ provision of health education services
* occupational health services

¢ preventive health check-up

Training and research activities

Training activities of a hospital, generally, refer to the
training of medical, paramedical and other support staff
(clinical or non-clinical) required and working in the
facility. Training is, generally, provided to:

¢ medical undergraduates

* nurses and midwives

¢ specialists and postgraduates

* medical social workers

* paramedical staff

The research activities carried out by hospitals are
for the enhancement of medical technology and services
in the following areas:

¢ physical, psychological and social aspects of

health and diseases
¢ clinical medicine
¢ hospital practices and administration

Classification of hospitals

Hospitals have been classified on the basis of different
criteria, which include size or bed capacity, ownership
or control, and objectives.

Size or bed capacity

The size of a hospital is determined by the number
of beds it has, based on which, hospitals can be
categorised as follows:

Small hospital: 100 or less beds

Medium-size hospital: 101 to 300 beds

Large hospital: 301 to 1000 beds

The bed strength of different types of hospitals is
as follows:

Teaching and referral hospital: 200 to 300

District hospital: 50 to 200

Taluka hospital: 50 to 200

Community Health Centre: 30 to 50

Primary Health Centre: 6 to 10

HospiraL MANAGEMENT SYSTEM

Notes

Notes

Role of General Duty Assistant in various
supporting departments in a hospital

Outpatient department
The advantage of an outpatient department or an OPD
is that most of the investigations and treatments can
be done here without admitting a patient, thus bringing
down the cost of medical expenditure. The scope of an
OPD includes the following:

¢ consultation and investigation

* preventive and promotive health care

e rehabilitation services

e health education

* counselling

An OPD is, usually, located at the entrance of a
hospital. It must be separate from the inpatient area
connected to it. It should have an easy access to the
Medical Record Department (MRD), X-ray room,
laboratory, pharmacy and billing counter. It must be
easily accessible to the casualty but separated from
it too.

Nursing

superintendent

Housekeeping
uorensturpy

Fig.1.3 Flowchart depicting the role of a General Duty Assistant in
various departments of a hospital

GENERAL Duty Assistant — Ciass XI

Laboratories

The following laboratories are, usually, found in
a hospital:

Bacteriology laboratory

It conducts tests related to bacteria and toxins produced
by them.

Clinical biochemistry laboratory

It conducts tests and researches on the biochemical
basis of diseases and clinical trials of new drugs.

Haematology laboratory

It is responsible for conducting blood-related
investigations, haemoglobin determinations, coagulation
time studies, red and white blood cell counts and special
blood pathology studies for anaemia, leukaemia, etc.

Parasitology laboratory

It involves the study of the presence of
parasites, cyst and ova of parasites found
in faeces.

Blood bank

It is here that blood is collected and tested
for diseases, if any, and then, transfused
into patients admitted in the hospital

Laboratory services must be easily /
available to outpatients and function
round-the-clock. Laboratories must be
located on the ground floor.

Kitchen or dietary department

The dietary department is responsible for
ensuring quality food service to patients
according to their needs and as prescribed
by doctors. It guides patients about the
diet they must take after discharge. One
dietary staff member is required for 15 to
20 patients. Dietician, food storekeeper,
cook, cook helpers and dish washer are
engaged in this department. One dietician
can look after up to 200 beds. One cook,

HospiraL MANAGEMENT SYSTEM

Fig. 1.5 Kitchen or dietary department
ina hospital

lo}

95

Fig. 1.6 Store of a laundry department

gl

a

ra

re

|

one cook helper, one bearer and one dishwasher are
sufficient to prepare meals for 20 patients and staff
members. The food service department functions round
the year.

Cleaning and laundry department

The cleaning and laundry department takes care of the
entire linen used in the hospital. It has the following
functions:

° washing dirty linen

¢ repairing torn linen

e replacing condemned linen

One laundry operator can wash linen of 25-30 beds.
One laundry orderly can assist in washing the linen of 50—
60 beds. The appointment of laundry
supervisor, mechanic and clerk, and
the number of staff employed depends
upon the size of a hospital. One
supervisor, one laundry mechanic
and one laundry clerk are required
in each shift. One washerman can
take care of 150-200 kg linen per
day. Each operation in an Operation
Theatre produces 7-8 kg of soiled
linen. Each delivery in a labour room
produces 7-8 kg of soiled linen. Each
ward patient produces about 5-6 kg

in a hospital of bed linen.

Housekeeping

The housekeeping department’s main function is to
keep the hospital clean. A sanitation in-charge must be
able to train her/his employees in cleaning techniques
that prevent the spread of diseases as cleaning is meant
to remove organic matter, in which bacteria and viruses
are harboured.

A sanitary attendant must be allotted a work area
of 1200-1500 sq ft, keeping in view the policies of the
hospital, the degree of cleanliness required, and electrical
cleaning equipment used, such as scrubbing machine,
vacuum cleaner, etc. For a nursing unit, one sanitary

GENERAL Duty Assistant — Ciass XI

attendant is recommended for
managing 10 beds. In the Intensive
Care Unit (ICU) and Critical Care Unit
(CCU) of a hospital, a higher degree of
cleanliness is required. Hence, more
sanitary attendants are provided there.
Generally, one supervisor is appointed |
to supervise 10 sanitary attendants.
For a  300-bed hospital, there
should be one sanitation in-charge,
four supervisors and 40 sanitary
attendants (30 sanitary attendants to Fig. 1.7 Staff of a hospital’s housekeeping
meet the daily requirement and 10 as department at work

leave reserve).

Administration

The administration of the entire hospital cannot
be vested on the administrator alone. It is the
collective responsibility of medical professionals and
supporting staff. The administrative staff, depending
upon the size of a hospital, comprises the administrator,
assistant administrator, business manager and
departmental heads.

Purchasing department

The purchasing department has the responsibility of
purchasing all supplies, (excluding food), and equipment
for the hospital.

Finance and accounts department

The finance and accounts department has the
responsibility of collecting money, paying for the
supplies and equipment, handling all records
pertaining to hospital finance, keeping records of
assets and liabilities, and assist in budget preparation.
The business manager is responsible for the functions of
the department and the accountants help the business
manager. A GDA serves as the missing link between all
supporting departments, in addition to her/his main
duty of patient care.

—
HospiraL MANAGEMENT SYSTEM en

wo

95

Notes

mg

a

ra

Practical Exercise

Visit a hospital and write the functions of its following
departments.

oR Ba

Dietary
Laundry
OPD
Laboratory

Administration

Activity

List the names of various specimens that will be sent to different
laboratories for investigation, like routine blood test, food
poisoning, etc.

Check Your Progress

A. Fill in the Blanks

1.

P°

The health care services should be promotive, ;
and rehabilitative.
In India, health care services is a issue.

A highly specialised doctor comes under level.
The restorative functions of a hospital include .
‘i and emergency services.

The bed strength of a Community Health Centre is

Blood test is done in laboratory.

A sanitary attendant should be allotted a work area of
sq ft, keeping in view the policies of

a hospital.

The department has the responsibility of

purchasing all supplies and equipment for a hospital

B. Multiple Choice Questions

1.

Hospital-based research activities enhance medical

technology and services in the area of

(a) physical and psycho-social aspects of health and
diseases

(b) clinical medicine

(c) hospital practices and administration

(d) All of the above

GENERAL Duty Assistant — Ciass XI

2.

Control of communicable diseases is
function.

(a) restorative

(b) preventive

(c) training

(d) creation

services are involved in dealing with
accidents, natural disasters andepidemics.
(a) Emergency
(b) Research
(c) Training
(d) Non-clinical

C. Short Answer Questions

1.

Gilg G2) be)

S

SESSION 2: QUALITIES OF A GENERAL
Duty ASSISTANT

This session throws an insight into the
role and responsibilities of a General
Duty Assistant in patient care.

A GDA provides nursing care to
patients under the supervision of nurses
in a hospital. S/he might spend more
time with patients than other health
care providers in a hospital. GDAs

Define the following:

(a) health care

(b) health care delivery system

(c) hospital

State the functions of a hospital system.

Describe the various components of a hospital system.
Enlist two health care delivery models followed in India.
Which is the most widely used health care model
in India?

Who has the primary responsibility of providing health
care to the population in our country?

Write a note on hospital housekeeping.

Describe two services provided by the Outpatient
Department.

Suppose you are a General Duty Assistant. A patient
approaches you to direct him to the laboratory for blood
test. What will you do?

must be empathetic, and have good Fig.1.8 A General Duty Assistant

communication and nursing skills.

5
| +B
HospiraL MANAGEMENT SYSTEM

assisting in patient care

fay

woe

95

A

Notes

a

ra

Essential duties and responsibilities

The essential duties of a GDA include the following:

1. Assist professional health care staff in performing
physical examinations and related procedures,
which include measuring and recording vital signs,
and physiological input and output assessment

Patient data, such as vital signs and
measurement of water intake and urination,
etc., are taken and recorded according to the
policies and procedures of a hospital.
Changes and abnormal findings in a patient’s
data are communicated timely to the registered
nurse and other team members.

The patient is assisted with personal hygiene.
S/he is given assistance with ADLs (Activities
of Daily Living), exercise and ambulation as
directed by therapists and health care staff.
Personal care and patient-related services
are provided in the patient’s home or hospital
as needed.

2. Help in maintaining the safety of patients

The patient’s environment, including her/his
room, examination room or treatment area is
kept neat and clean.

Meal preparation and slight housekeeping
duties may be necessary in the home setting to
maintain a safe environment.

Equipment maintenance and safety checks
are completed according to the policies and
procedures followed by a hospital.

Events and incidents are reported promptly
to those concerned using the health system’s
reporting process, which includes computer
and various software.

3. Perform administrative support functions

Medical record duties, including file
maintenance and _ record-keeping, are
completed when necessary.

Orders related to purchases and supply of
inventory are completed according to the
hospital guidelines.

GENERAL Duty Assistant — Ciass XI

Duties, including scheduling diagnostic
procedures, meeting and greeting patients,
or delivering specific supplies and
pharmaceuticals, are performed efficiently.

4. Master necessary skills and competencies

Competency in the use of new equipment
(i.e., lifting and moving patients) is achieved
and maintained.

Opportunities for professional development
are identified and goals for self-improvement
are set.

The education and development of others is
fostered by sharing information learned through
individual professional development.

A positive environment for the professional
development of co-workers is encouraged.
Annual mandatory training activities and
regulatory in-service hour requirements are
completed within set timeframes.

Organisational duties
The organisational duties of a GDA include the following:
1. Communicate to maintain good interpersonal
relationships

Positive professional qualities of an employee
are reflected in her/his verbal and non-verbal
communication.

Information about patients and staff is provided
in a supportive and timely manner.
Interpersonal conflicts are resolved as per
organisational policies.

Diverse perspectives in personal and social
arenas are accommodated to nurture inclusive
work environment.

Clear communication pattern is followed.

2. Service extended to internal and external customers

Confidentiality for patient and employee
information must be maintained.

Appropriate resources are used consistently to
meet customer needs.

Relationships with staff are fostered to meet
internal and external customer needs.

HospiraL MANAGEMENT SYSTEM

Notes

fay

mah

a

ra

95

on)

Notes

¢ Positive work relationships with peers,
management and customers are maintained at
all times.

* Organisational values must be followed with
respect, integrity, excellence and must be
evident in the GDA’s behaviour.

3. Participate in performance improvement activities

e An initiative taken by an employee is
demonstrated by trying to resolve problems of
the people around.

¢ Change is faced with positive and supportive
behaviour.

Practical Exercise

1. Prepare a presentation on the role and functions of a General
Duty Assistant in a hospital.
2. Think of ways by which a GDA can enhance the interpersonal
relationship standards of a hospital. For example,
a) fostering comfortable interpersonal relationship between
colleagues
b) communicate with patients

Check Your Progress

A. Fill in the Blanks

i, AN provides support to doctors, nurses and
other support staff to take personal care of patients.

2. Services extended to customers include for
patient and employee information.

B.. Multiple Choice Questions

1. Equipment maintenance and supply check
(a) General Duty Assistant rules
(b) policy-based procedures
(c) patient’s decisions
(d) None of the above

2) enhances interpersonal skills.
(a) Positive communication
(b) Negative interpersonal skill
(c) Unclear speech
(d) All of the above

GENERAL Duty Assistant — Ciass XI

3. Roles and responsibilities of a GDA include
(a) maintaining patient safety
(b) assisting health care staff
(c) good interpersonal skill
(d) All of the above

C. Match the Columns
1. Patient care procedure (a) Good interpersonal skills
and managing customers

2. Administrative support (b) Maintaining a patient’s
functions personal hygiene

3. Organisational duties  _(c) Productive work habits

4. Teamwork (d) Medical record-keeping
and supply of inventory

D. Short Answer Questions

1. Write two professional duties of a GDA while performing
the physical examination of a patient.

2. Cite any two core organisational duties of a GDA.

3. How can a GDA contribute in enhancing teamwork?

SEssION 3: CopEs oF CONDUCT FOR GENERAL
Duty ASSISTANT

In this session, you will learn about the qualities of
a General Duty Assistant. A GDA or a Patient Care
Assistant (PCA) works in a range of health care settings
and contributes in all areas of the sector. S/he works
under the supervision of a nurse in a hospital. As per
institutional guidelines, the GDA must follow the codes
of conduct of her/his profession.

Medical ethics

Some of the important medical ethics a GDA must follow
as per the Indian Medical Standards are discussed in
this session.

Informed consent

The GDA must tell the truth to a patient and ensure
her/his understandability while obtaining her/his
consent to carry out a procedure or treatment.

HospiraL MANAGEMENT SYSTEM

Notes

fay

mh

a

ra

95

©

Notes

Confidentiality

The GDA must keep the medical details of patients
confidential. Except for professional reasons, the details
must not be discussed with others or in public.

Communication

Clear communication between the GDA and a patient
is essential for successful treatment. Any doubt that
the patient has must be dealt with care and resolved at
once in a language that s/he understands.

Cultural concerns

The GDA must respect the cultural practices of a patient
in any circumstance, e.g., allowing the practice of rituals
before procedures.

Communication with patient’s family

The GDA must understand the anxiety of the relatives
of a patient and inform them from time-to-time about
her/his medical conditions.

Business related issues

Health care providers must not entertain unethical
practices in hospital.

Informing about illness, medication and side
effects of medicines

Telling the truth implies respect for autonomy. Providing
the correct information to a patient enables her/him to
make reasoned and informed choice(s).

Follow hospital guidelines

The GDA must follow the guidelines for hygiene, patient
care, etc. This helps in preventing patients and staff
working in a hospital from catching hospital-induced
infections and allergies.

Accountability

As a professional, the GDA will be accountable for
actions and omissions in his/her professional practice
and justify the decisions.

GENERAL Duty Assistant — Ciass XI

Qualities of a General Duty Assistant

Empathy

¢ Ability to identify with and understand the other
person’s feelings, situation and motives

¢ Interest in working with people

¢ Care about others and ability to communicate and
work with them

¢ Understand the needs of people and learn effective
communication skills to develop empathy

Honesty

¢ Truthfulness and integrity

¢ Admit to committing mistakes and correct them
Dependability

¢ Accept the responsibility as required
¢ Maintain punctuality
¢ Perform the assigned tasks efficiently and on time

Willingness to learn

¢ Ability to learn and adapt to changes that results
from inventions and other factors
¢ Willingness to study further if required

Patience

¢ Must be tolerant
e Learn to deal with workload, frustration and
overcome work-related obstacles

Acceptance of criticism

¢ Take the criticism of patients, employers and
co-workers in a constructive manner so as to
improve her/his efficiency

Enthusiasm

¢ Must enjoy work
e Enthusiasm benefits oneself and others in
improving the team spirit

HospiraL MANAGEMENT SYSTEM

Notes

fay

gol

a

ra

95

fo)

Notes

Self-motivation

¢ Initiate and acclimatise with a task
¢ Individually determine work on priority basis and
follow them

Tact

e Ability to tackle difficult situations with ease
¢ Avoid being judgemental about other’s feelings
and show consideration towards them

Competence

¢ Capability to perform tasks efficiently

¢ Follow instructions

e Use approved procedures and try to maintain
accuracy

¢ Get guidance whenever necessary

Discretion

e Information must not be passed on to anyone
without authorisation

e A patient is entitled to confidential care

¢ Be discreet and ensure that the patient’s rights
are not violated

Team, player

e Learn to work with others

e Each member of a health care team will contribute
to provide the patient with quality care

e A team of workers can accomplish the goals faster

Personal appearance

¢ Keep yourself well-groomed

e Wear the uniform as per the place of employment

e¢ Wear a photo identity card as issued by the place
of employment

Professional practices for GDA
e Politely enquire from the preceptor or instructor
about all facets of work rotation.
¢ Follow laws and regulations that govern the Health
Information Patient Privacy Act (HIPPA) and seek
clarification when needed.

GENERAL Duty Assistant — Ciass XI

¢ Master the routine tasks and specific procedures
assigned by the preceptor to focus on competencies
and skills specific to the rotation.

¢ Report to the assigned externship or internship
site on time and follow the procedures required to
make up for the missed hours.

Practices to be avoided by GDA

e Advising patients and other health professionals
without the preceptor’s authority

¢ Accepting payment, either directly or indirectly,
from patient(s)

¢ Requesting to be placed with someone you are
related to

¢ Requesting for changes and withdrawal after
rotation assignments are made

Practical Exercise

1. Visit a hospital and observe the services provided by a GDA.
Prepare a report based on your observations and submit it to
the teacher.

2. List the qualities of a GDA.

Activity

Debate and discuss:

As a GDA, following a self-motivated working style is beneficial
for professional growth.

Check Your Progress

A. Multiple Choice Questions

1. AGDA named Manu was transporting a patient suffering
from a chronic disease. Manu understood the patient’s
anxiety and answered his queries satisfactorily. Which
ability of Manu, as an ideal GDA, is reflected in this?

(a) Distraction

(b) Empathy

(c) Indifferent

(d) None of the above

2. AGDA must be able to work together in a
for the benefit of a patient.
(a) individual manner
(b) team

HospiraL MANAGEMENT SYSTEM

Notes

fay

wo

95

bw

Notes

a

ra

(c) personal way
(d) All of the above

3. Professional, legal or ethical issues are followed and
governed by
(a) Health Act
(b) Personal Privacy Act
(c) Health Information Patient Privacy Act
(d) None of the above

B. Short Answer Questions

1. Write any three qualities that a GDA must possess.

2. Explain the important medical ethics of a GDA and the
need for following them.

3. Enumerate the practices to be avoided by a GDA while
performing duties.

Session 4: PERSONAL HYGIENE PRACTICES FOR
GENERAL Duty ASSISTANT

Personal hygiene reflects good health. Lack of
cleanliness may cause many infectious diseases,
including epidemics, e.g., plague, dengue, malaria,
etc. Contribution of every individual in maintaining
personal and environmental hygiene influences the
health standard index of a society. Lack of personal
hygiene causes dandruff, bad breath, worm infestation,
diarrhoea, common cold and many other infections

Medical hand hygiene practices

This session explains the importance of washing
hands for the maintenance of a healthy life. Hygiene
is a set of routine personal cleaning practices followed
for maintaining a healthy lifestyle. Modern medical
sciences follow certain standards of hygiene in different
situations. The concept of hygiene varies across regions,
cultures, gender groups and individuals. Some regular
hygienic practices are considered as good habits by
most people in the society, while the lack of these may
be treated as disrespectful or even as a threat.

Hand washing is the act of cleaning one’s hands with
or without the use of water, a soapy liquid or sanitiser,
or soap for removing soil, dirt and microorganisms
present on the skin. Medical hand hygiene pertains to
the practices to be followed while applying medicine
or providing other medical services so as to reduce

GENERAL Duty Assistant — Ciass XI

or minimise the spread of diseases. Washing the
hands with soap helps prevent diarrhoea and acute
respiratory infections (ARI). The purpose of hand
washing is to clean the hands of disease-carrying
microorganisms (including bacteria and viruses) and
harmful chemicals. This must be followed strictly by
all, especially those working in the food preparation
industry and medical field. It helps in protecting us
from diseases transmitted through faecal-oral routes
and direct physical contact (such as impetigo). Alcohol
gelis a disinfectant and is helpful in killing bacteria but
its effectiveness is disputed as it may lead to antibiotic-
resistant bacterial strains. Hand washing or cleaning is
recommended after using the toilet, changing sanitary
napkins and diapers, handling animals and touching
food. One must wash hands with liquid soap and warm
water for at least 10 seconds.

Why is hand hygiene important?

Hands, normally, have a ‘resident’ population of
microorganisms called ‘transient’ organisms apart from
those accumulated during everyday activities. Most
germs present on our hands are harmless but some
cause cold, flu, skin infections or diarrhoea. Forgetting
to wash hands causes the spread of these germs to
other people, besides infecting our eyes, mouths or
open cuts. Hand washing prevents the transfer of
microorganisms to patients.

Why is hand hygiene important.in health care?
Patients are more vulnerable to catching infections
from germs carried on the hands or other hospital
staff when brought to a health care environment.
Patients, visitors, health care workers, nursing
staff and doctors can cut the risk of infections by
cleaning their hands at regular intervals.

Advice to health care staff and patients

All health care staff must wash hands with soap or use
alcohol gel:

¢ before and after direct patient contact.

¢ after attending to the toilet needs of a patient.

¢ after carrying out medical procedures.

¢ before wearing and after removing gloves.

HospiraL MANAGEMENT SYSTEM

Notes

The temperature of hot water used for hand wash
is not sufficient to kill bacteria. Bacteria grow much
faster at body temperature (37°C). Warm water with
soap is more effective than cold water for the removal
of microorganisms as flowing water helps dissolve soil
and dirt from hands easily. A hand sanitiser or hand
antiseptic is a non-water-based hand hygiene agent.
Hand sanitisers are effective against bacteria but not
for some viruses, which commonly cause contagious
gastroenteritis. Avoid touching wound dressings, stitches,
catheters or intravenous line, unless unavoidable, as it
may lead to the spreading of germs to other parts of the
body. Medical hand washing or cleaning must be done
for a minimum of 10 seconds, using soap and water or
a sanitiser. Let us now practise the steps used for
hand washing [Fig. 1.9 (i-xii)].

Steps for hand washing

(i) Wet your hands (ii) Apply soap to cover (iii) Rub palm-to-palm (iv) Right palm over the left
with water the palm surface dorsum with interfaced

fingers and vice versa

‘NX

fay

95

(v) Palm-to-palm with (vi) Backs of fingers to _ (vii) Rotational rubbing of (viii) Rotational rubbing,

fingers interfaced opposing palms with the the left thumb clasped backward and forward
fingers interlocked in the right palm and with clasped fingers of
vice versa the right hand in the left

palm and vice versa
3 fc
N ie
(ix) Wash the hands (x) Dry it with a towel (xi) Use the towel to turn (xii)...and your hands
with water off the faucet are clean

Fig. 1.9 (i-xii) Stepwise procedure of hand washing

GENERAL Duty Assistant — Ciass XI

= Eb
sag

Personal grooming practices for GDA

Personal grooming (also called ‘titivating’ and ‘preening’)
involves cleaning of body, and trimming of nails and
hair to improve one’s personality and hygiene.

Importance of personal grooming

Personal grooming encourages a person to maintain
a pleasing and attractive appearance, and helps in
developing a positive self-image about oneself.
¢ It makes a person neat and appealing.
¢ Grooming indicates the readiness of a person
for work.

Basic grooming

Basic grooming involves practices that are followed daily
to keep oneself healthy and enhance one’s personality.
Practices that must be followed regularly are as follows:
¢ Brush your teeth twice a day
¢ Take bath daily and wash your hair at regular
intervals.
¢ Keep your ears and nose clean.
¢ Take care of your skin by following a healthy diet,
water intake and regular exercises.
¢ Cut and clean your fingernails and toenails.
¢ Groom your facial hair. Avoid patchy beard and
long mustache.
¢ Apply deodorant.
e Always wear your identity card and a clean uniform.

Basic dressing

e¢ White socks with dark shoes, and vice versa, must
be avoided.

¢ Wear well-fitted T-shirts.

¢ An outfit must not be repeated for two consecutive
days or more.

¢ Avoid wearing faded clothes.

¢ Do not wear clothes that are overly wrinkled,
dirtied or stained.

HospiraL MANAGEMENT SYSTEM

Notes

fay

mga

a

ra

95

on)

Notes

Basic appearance

¢ Comb your hair to enhance its appearance.

e Wear glass frames as per the requirement.

¢ Maintain fitness by participating in activities, like
rock climbing, kick boxing, dancing, etc.

Practical Exercise

Take up the following activities in groups:

1. How does hand washing help in preventing the spread of
germs? What are the precautions that need to be taken while
using various types of soaps or hand sanitisers?

2. Practise the steps of hand washing.

w

. Perform activities for demonstrating grooming habits.

4. Develop a project to generate awareness in your community
about hand washing.

Check Your Progress

A. Fill in the Blanks
1. Personal grooming is also called

PD, is a process that makes one look neat and
attractive.

3. Basic grooming enhances one’s

B. Multiple Choice Questions

il is a set of practices performed for the
preservation of health.
(a) Hygiene
(b) Health
(c) Environment
(d) Habits

2. Health education can ‘
(a) improve community hygiene
(b) prevent illness
(c) inculcate positive health attitude
(d) All of the above

Bo is an important measure to prevent the
spread of pathogens.
(a) Unclean hands
(b) Washing hands
(c) Rubbing hands
(d) None of the above

GENERAL Duty Assistant — Ciass XI

C. Match the Columns

1. Hair (a) Dry and brush the hair

2. Skin (b) Brush the teeth twice a day

Smleetia (c) Wash hands with soap and dry them
4. Hands  (d) Use soap and water while bathing

D. Short Answer Questions

1.

2.
a.
4

What is hand hygiene?

Why do we need to practise hand hygiene?
What is personal grooming?

Why is grooming important?

E. Mark True or False

iF
2.

3.

Grooming is not an essential part of a GDA’s work.
Clear communication skills are to be followed while
conversing with patients and their relatives.

Personal appearance makes one look neat and appealing.

HospiraL MANAGEMENT SYSTEM

Notes

